---
title: "Vector bundles and dependent linear logic in differential geometry"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2017-ct
venue: "Category Theory 2017"
date: 2016-07-19
location: "Vancouver, British Columbia"
---
ulticategories provide a categorical semantics for multi-linear maps in linear
algebra, and Hermida showed that representable multicategories are equivalent to
monoidal categories [1]. Blute-Cockett-Seely introduced systems of linear maps to
provide a language for multilinear maps in categories of “smooth” maps, and described when these multilinear maps gave rise to a representable multicategory or a storage comonad [2]. Topological vector bundles - epimorphisms q : E → B so that for every b ∈ B, q−1(b) is a vector space - give a model of local linear structure which is a basic building block in differential geometry.
In this talk, indexed systems of linear maps are developed to model the fibrewise
linearity of topological vector bundles. Indexed systems of linear maps gives rise to fiberwise notions of monoidal representability and storage, which in turn gives rise to an indexed monoidal category and the categorical semantics of dependent linear logic [3] [4]. This structure is then applied to the differential bundle fibration in a tangent category [5], which was first explored by Cockett and Cruttwell [6], to cleanly express the basic concepts of differential forms and symplectic geometry in a tangent category.

References:
[1] C. Hermida, Representable Multicategories, Advances in Mathematics 151 (2000) 164–225.
[2] R. Blute, R. Cockett, R. Seely, Cartesian Differential Storage Categories, Theory and Application of Categories 30 (2015) 620–686.
[3] K. Ponto, M. Shulman, Duality and traces for indexed monoidal categories, Theory and Applications of Categories 26 (2012) 582–659.
[4] M. V´ak´ar, A categorical semantics for linear logical frameworks, types, International Conference on Foundations of Software Science and Computation Structures (2015) 102-116.
[5] R. Cockett, G. Cruttwell, Differential Structure, Tangent Structure and SDG, Applied Categorical Structures 22 (2014) 331–417.
[6] R. Cockett, G. Cruttwell, Differential bundles and fibrations for tangent categories, Cahiers de Topologie et G´eom´etie Diff´erentielle Cat´egoriques (To Appear).